The operating system getting stuck at bootup is a bothersome issue as it prevents you from accessing any application on your PC. 
As we cannot access the OS, we are left with the BIOS and the bootloader which can be a bit complex 
to deal with for an average user.

Ubuntu is a stable operating system, but as it is very forgiving in terms of superuser privileges, 
sometimes one might mess up with the system files unintentionally which causes issues like this.

In this guide, we will discuss the issue along with its potential fixes or workarounds.
Reasons for the error.

There can be many reasons for this error to occur. Some of the most common causes are:

Issues with hardware or device drivers.
Issues with the GRUB configuration file.
Broken software packages.
PC crashed during an update.

Identifying the problem:

One can easily identify the problem by looking at the system logs using the journalctl utility. This utility can be used 
in Ubuntu recovery mode hence making it ideal for troubleshooting when your PC is having trouble booting up. 

To see the system logs using journalctl, follow the steps below:

1. Turn on your system, then quickly press and hold the Shift key to enter the GNU GRUB menu.
2. Select the option which says ‘Advanced options for Ubuntu‘.
3. In the next menu, select the option ending with ‘(recovery mode)’ which will open a few recovery options.
4. Select the Drop to root shell prompt option and press Enter for maintenance.
5. Enter the following code:

$  journalctl --since today

This code will show the system log for all the activities that occurred today on your system.

If the log is very long, you can limit the number of lines using the command:

$ journalctl --lines=100

The above code is an example to show the last 100 lines of the log. If you notice any error (usually highlighted with red), or warning (highlighted with yellow), 
it is likely to be the cause of the OS freezing on boot.

Method 2: Remove the Nvidia driver

NOTE: Try this method only if you have an integrated GPU available on your system as this will remove your dedicated GPU drivers.

To utilize the dedicated Nvidia GPU, an operating system needs Nvidia drivers. Nvidia drivers are usually a common cause of this issue on Linux systems as there is a chance that your system might have corrupted driver files.

In case of corrupted driver files, we need to remove them. To do this, follow the steps below:

1. Using the method discussed in the ‘Identifying the problem‘ section, Select the Drop to root shell prompt option

2. In the root shell prompt, enter the following code:

$ sudo apt-get purge nvidia*

This command will remove all the Nvidia driver-related files and your system will boot up normally.

Once you have successfully logged in to the system, you can reinstall the drivers by using the following method:

1. Open Additional drivers.
2. Select the suitable latest version and click on Apply Changes.
3. Wait for the installation to complete then restart the system.

Method 3: Boot into Ubuntu without a graphics driver

This method doesn’t have the constraint of only working for Nvidia drivers. Using this method allows the kernel to boot 
up the OS without loading the graphics driver. This is a fairly easy and quick solution, just follow the steps below:

1. Turn on your system, then quickly press and hold the Shift key to enter the GNU GRUB menu

2. While in the GRUB menu, press E to edit the bootup commands

3. Look for the line starting with linux and add nomodeset at the end

4. Press F10 or CTRL+X to boot into the system.

From here, you can either reinstall the driver files or use Ubuntu as it is.

To make nomodeset permanent (so that you don’t have to edit the bootup commands every time), open the terminal and 
follow these steps:

1. Enter the following command to edit the grub file:

$ sudo vi /etc/default/grub

2. Add nomodeset to the GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT="quiet splash” so that the content of the file looks like 
the following:

3. Save the changes made by pressing the ESC key and entering wq!

4. Update the GRUB file using:

$ sudo update-grub2





